
--- PAGE 1 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
1 | 26 
 
IREB Examination 
Certified Professional for 
Requirements Engineering 
Foundation Level 
Practice Exam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Questionnaire: Set_Public_EN_3.3.1 
Syllabus: CPRE Foundation Level 3 
 
 Passed 
 Failed 
Total number of points 
  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
2 | 26 
Explanation of the practice exam 
This practice exam provides an example of an actual IREB Requirements Engineering 
Foundation Level exam. It can be used when preparing for the actual exam. 
If you want to use this practice exam under realistic conditions, print out the exam and 
answer the questions without means such as training materials or books within a limit of 75 
minutes. Make sure that you encounter as little disturbance as possible when answering the 
questions. 
In order to pass this exam, just like in an actual examination, a mark of 70.00 percent must be 
achieved. This is 49.00 points out of a maximum 70 possible points for the practice exam at 
hand. 
Evaluation of the results 
In the document "Answers to the practice exam EN", you will find the correct answers. To 
determine the number of points you have achieved, please use the Excel sheet 
"CorrectionAidForThePracticeExam EN". 
Terms of use 
This practice exam, as well as parts of it, may be distributed in unmodified form and without 
charge and may be used for training purposes provided IREB e.V. is stated as source and 
owner of the copyright. 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
3 | 26 
1. 
Introduction and Overview of Requirements Engineering 
1.  
Which of the following statements on quality requirements are true and 
which are false? 
K0111 
2 Points 
 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
 
A) Quality requirements refer to the process of creating software and not to 
the product. 
 
 
 
 
B) Quality requirements can complement functional requirements. 
 
 
 
 
C) Quality requirements are elicited after the functional requirements. 
 
 
 
 
D) Quality requirements can be substantiated with additional functional 
requirements. 
 
 
 
2.  
Which of the following tasks is NOT a core task of the Requirements 
Engineer? (1 answer) 
A0120 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Eliciting requirements 
 
 
B) Formalizing requirements 
 
 
C) Documenting requirements 
 
 
D) Validating requirements 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
4 | 26 
3.  
Amongst other things, the customer demands the following from the 
contractor responsible for delivering an information system: 
A) The contractor shall process a change request within five days. 
B) The test reports from the integration test must be disclosed for 
examination and the test report from the system test must be 
handed over. 
C) At any time, the system shall enable a throughput of 100 
transactions per second. 
D) The Subversion tool must be used for configuration management. 
E) Under normal load, the response time must be no more than two 
seconds in 90 percent of the cases. 
Which two requirements refer to the system to be realized? (2 answers) 
P0113 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Requirement A 
 
 
B) Requirement B 
 
 
C) Requirement C 
 
 
D) Requirement D 
 
 
E) Requirement E 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
5 | 26 
2. 
Fundamental Principles of Requirements Engineering 
4.  
Which of the following statements does NOT represent a fundamental 
principle of Requirements Engineering? (1 answer) 
A3205 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Value orientation 
 
 
B) Problem - requirement - solution 
 
 
C) Regular retrospectives 
 
 
D) Systematic and disciplined work 
 
 
5.  
Shared understanding is a principle of Requirements Engineering. For 
each of the following statements about shared understanding decide, 
whether it is true or false. 
K3206 
2 Points 
 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
 
A) Achieving explicit shared understanding is one of the main 
goals of Requirements Engineering. 
 
 
 
 
B) Without shared understanding, it is impossible to identify the 
relevant requirement sources. 
 
 
 
 
C) Some degree of implicit shared understanding is crucial 
because it is impossible to specify everything explicitly. 
 
 
 
 
D) Requirements Engineering in agile development does not work 
without relying on implicit shared understanding. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
6 | 26 
6.  
When defining the system boundary and the context boundary, which 
aspects need to be considered and which do not need to be 
considered? 
K0202 
2 Points 
 
Needs to be 
considered 
Does not need 
to be considered 
 
 
 
 
 
A) The system 
 
 
 
 
B) The system context 
 
 
 
 
C) The application domain 
 
 
 
 
D) The interfaces between system and system context 
 
 
 
7.  
During the Requirements Engineering process for an online database 
application, you find out that data protection regulations do not apply, as 
the data processed by the system is anonymized. 
What will be influenced by this finding? (1 answer) 
A0207 
1 Point 
 
 
A) System boundary 
 
 
B) Context boundary 
 
 
C) System interfaces 
 
 
D) Application boundary 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
7 | 26 
3. 
Work Products and Documentation Practices 
8.  
Which of the following statements regarding work products is NOT 
correct? (1 answer) 
A3310 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Any recorded information that is created during Requirements Engineering is a 
work product. 
 
 
B) Recorded artifacts that describe gathered information as an intermediate or 
final result are work products. 
 
 
C) User stories, activity diagrams, use cases and prototypes are work products. 
 
 
D) Only final requirements documents that describe a fixed set of requirements 
are work products. 
 
 
9.  
Which of the following concepts CANNOT be found in UML class 
diagrams? (1 answer) 
A3311 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Associations 
 
 
B) States 
 
 
C) Multiplicities 
 
 
D) Attributes 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
8 | 26 
10.  
You want to design a requirements document in such a way that it is 
particularly well suited for the people who will work with the document in 
further phases of the development process. 
From the following sentences, choose the two best combinations of the 
role and its criteria for the requirements. (2 answers) 
P0416 
2 Points 
 
 
A) For the testers, it must be possible to realize the requirements. 
 
 
B) For the developers, it must be possible to change the requirements easily. 
 
 
C) For all people involved, the requirements in a work product have to be 
consistent. 
 
 
D) For the project manager, the requirements have to be necessary. 
 
 
E) For the maintenance staff, it must be possible to prioritize the requirements. 
 
 
11.  
A company wants to support its process of tender preparation with an 
information system. You are the Requirements Engineer responsible in 
this project. During initial discussions with different representatives, you 
discover, among other aspects, the following: 
• 
You do not understand some of the company's terminology. 
• 
It is obvious that the company representatives do not use 
consistent terminology. 
• 
Your main contact person at the company described their ideas by 
telling you the expected interactions between specialists and the 
information system in the form of different flows of user actions 
and system reactions. 
Which two of the following approaches are particularly well suited to 
eliciting and documenting the requirements in this case? (2 answers) 
P0417 
2 Points 
 
 
A) Creating a statechart 
 
 
B) Establishing a glossary 
 
 
C) Eliciting and documenting the quality requirements 
 
 
D) Creating a use case diagram and specifying the use cases 
 
 
E) Creating and testing prototypes 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
9 | 26 
12.  
Which of the following statements on the choice of notations for the 
documentation of functional requirements apply and which do not apply? 
K0418 
2 Points 
 
Applies 
Does not 
apply 
 
 
 
 
A) Stakeholders should be able to read the notation used for a work 
product. 
 
 
 
 
B) Diagrams have to be applied in projects with object-oriented 
development. 
 
 
 
 
C) To ensure optimal communication, a notation that is aligned to the 
type of requirement should be used. 
 
 
 
 
D) Graphical notations are well suited for describing system 
requirements. 
 
 
 
13.  
IREB defines quality criteria for work products. Which of the following 
statements about quality criteria are true and which are false? 
K3423 
2 Points 
 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
 
A) A requirement specification is non-redundant if each requirement is 
documented only once and does not overlap with others. 
 
 
 
 
B) A use case diagram might be not consistent with an activity diagram even 
if both of them are non-redundant. 
 
 
 
 
C) A requirements specification is consistent if no single requirement 
contradicts with other requirements. 
 
 
 
 
D) A use case specification is conformant if it contains all relevant 
requirements for the final product. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
10 | 26 
14.  
A phrase template can be used to document natural-language 
requirements. You want to introduce such a template in your project and 
have to convince your project manager of the benefits. 
Which are the two best arguments? (2 answers) 
P0510 
2 Points 
 
 
A) Phrase templates help to document well-structured requirements by providing 
a predefined syntactic structure. 
 
 
B) Requirements formulated in accordance with a phrase template do not 
contain incomplete relationships. 
 
 
C) Learning how to write requirements in accordance with a phrase template 
does not require much time. 
 
 
D) Using a phrase template basically delivers a greater degree of information 
content. 
 
 
E) Requirements written in accordance with a phrase template ensure that the 
quality criteria for requirements are met. 
 
 
15.  
You are given the following requirement: "The system Alpha should display 
all data sets in all submenus". What is the most severe issue in this 
requirement? (1 answer) 
A0508 
1 Point 
 
 
A) The requirement is written in the passive voice. 
 
 
B) Universal quantifiers have been used. 
 
 
C) The requirement has incomplete conditions. 
 
 
D) Nominalizations have been used. 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
11 | 26 
16.  
Which of the following statements are true and which are false when 
working with template-based work products? 
K3520 
2 Points 
 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
 
A) Templates provide a blueprint for structuring single requirements, as well 
as whole specifications. 
 
 
 
 
B) Template-based work products for single requirements can help to 
prevent incomplete formulation of requirements in natural language. 
 
 
 
 
C) Template-based work products are inherently better in content than 
freely formulated requirements. 
 
 
 
 
D) Templates are obligatory for all authors of a requirements specification. 
 
 
 
17.  
A system needs to be developed for managing the fleet of a courier 
service. The system shall periodically transmit the geographical position of 
a vehicle to the central unit. The following requirements were documented: 
R1: "The system should be in operation as long as the ignition key is in the 
ignition lock." 
R2: "The system should be in operation as long as a driver is seated in the 
driver's seat." 
R3: "The system should switch to lost-signal if less than three satellites are 
available." 
Which diagram best supports this type of requirement? (1 answer) 
A3521 
1 Point 
 
A) State diagram 
 
 
B) Class diagram 
 
 
C) Context diagram 
 
 
D) Use case diagram 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
12 | 26 
18.  
To support young actors and directors, a contest for short films is 
held. The three best films will be presented with an award. The films 
submitted must have a maximum length of 20 minutes and must take 
the constraints depicted in the following diagram into consideration. 
K0619 
2 Points 
 
 
Do the following statements match the above diagram? 
 
Matches 
Does not 
match 
 
 
 
 
 
A) Three directors may direct a film collaboratively. 
 
 
 
 
B) A film with only one actor may be submitted. 
 
 
 
 
C) A director may direct two films submitted. 
 
 
 
 
D) An actor may star in any number of films. 
 
 
 
 
E) A film must have ten actors starring in it. 
 
 
 
19.  
What is NOT depicted in a use case diagram? (1 answer) 
A0620 
1 Point 
 
 
A) The process steps of an application 
 
 
B) The actors of an application 
 
 
C) The boundary between an application and its environment 
 
 
D) An application's functionality 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
13 | 26 
20. 
A company wants to introduce an authorization process for accessing 
confidential parts of the company's intranet by issuing time-limited 
passwords. For that reason a state diagram is modeled to express the 
possible states and state transitions for a user. 
K3605 
2 Points 
 
 
 
Determine which of the following requirements are modeled correctly in 
the state diagram above and which are modeled incorrectly or are not 
modeled at all. 
 
Correctly 
modeled 
Incorrect or 
not modeled 
 
 
 
 
 
A) Users in state blocked can be unblocked by resetting the user's 
password. 
 
 
 
 
B) If abuse for an user in state entitled has been noticed, the user’s 
password is blocked. 
 
 
 
 
C) If the validity period for an user in state entitled has expired, the 
password is deleted and the user is set to state not entitled. 
 
 
 
 
D) If an application request is approved, the user gets an approval 
mail. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
14 | 26 
21.  
The following activity diagram represents performing a measurement. 
K0643 
2 Points 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
15 | 26 
 
Do the following statements match the above diagram? 
 
Matches 
Does not 
match 
 
 
 
 
 
A) Initialize measuring device must happen prior to Register at server. 
 
 
 
 
B) Register at server happens as soon as Load certificates is ready. 
 
 
 
 
C) Initialize network connection and Load certificates must finish at 
the same time. 
 
 
 
 
D) Deactivate measuring device is executed as soon as Data receipt 
confirmed is true. 
 
 
 
22. 
In Requirements Engineering, which two substantial advantages do graphical 
models (e.g., use case models or state machines) have over plain textual 
specifications in natural language? (2 answers) 
P0623 
2 Points 
 
 
A) Models often focus on specific aspects and reduce the cognitive load for 
understanding the requirements. 
 
 
B) Models allow the complete description of requirements for a planned system. 
 
 
C) Models can be checked more easily than natural language and have a restricted 
syntax that reduces possible ambiguities and omissions. 
 
 
D) Models are created with tools using a repository. Therefore, models are better 
suited for managing requirements. 
 
 
E) With proper tools, source code can be generated from models, thus saving the 
effort for testing. 
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
16 | 26 
23. 
For each of the statements on the diagram below, decide whether it is true 
or false. 
K0624 
2 Points 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
17 | 26 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
 
A) A route can be calculated without querying traffic information. 
 
 
 
 
B) A route can be calculated after querying traffic information. 
 
 
 
 
C) The system can ask for the desire to calculate the route dynamically without 
having to determine the GPS coordinates first. 
 
 
 
 
D) The order of Enter destination and Determine GPS coordinates is arbitrary. 
 
 
 
24. 
You are modeling the requirements for a management system to be applied 
in universities. The steps for enrollment of a new student at a university are to 
be documented using a model-based approach. Which two of the following 
diagrams are best suited to this aim? (2 answers) 
P0626 
2 Points 
 
 
A) BPMN diagram 
 
 
B) Laus-Ohl diagram 
 
 
C) Activity diagram 
 
 
D) Class diagram 
 
 
E) Use case diagram 
 
 
25. 
When specifying a system, different aspects have to be considered. What is 
described in the function and flow aspect? (1 answer) 
A0627 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Portability of the system 
 
 
B) Reaction of the system to an internal state transition 
 
 
C) Structure of input and output data 
 
 
D) Transformation of input data into output data 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
18 | 26 
4. 
Practices for Requirements Elaboration 
26. 
You have been appointed as a Requirements Engineer in a company and 
are in the process of eliciting detailed requirements for a use case. To do 
this, you run through a series of interviews with various stakeholders. In the 
interview follow-up, you notice an inconsistency in the statements about 
the arrangement of functions in the menu on the user interface. What is 
the best way to deal with this situation? (1 answer) 
A3409 
1 Point 
 
 
 
A) You discuss this finding with an available stakeholder and get a clear 
statement and record their advice. 
 
 
B) You invite all stakeholders involved to a meeting and reach an agreement on 
this point. 
 
 
C) Due to your experience with user interfaces you can solve the problem on your 
own, thus saving valuable time. 
 
 
D) You forward the problem to the product owner and let them decide on this 
matter based on the evaluation of potential risks. 
 
 
27.  
Which two of the following statements best characterize the relationship 
between a Requirements Engineer and a stakeholder in the role of a tester? 
(2 answers) 
P0309 
1 Point 
 
 
A) The Requirements Engineer provides input for the stakeholder's work. 
 
 
B) The Requirements Engineer's results are managed by the stakeholder. 
 
 
C) The stakeholder can contribute to ensure the quality of the Requirements 
Engineer's work. 
 
 
D) The stakeholder supervises the Requirements Engineer's work. 
 
 
E) There is no relationship between the Requirements Engineer's work and the 
stakeholder role. 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
19 | 26 
28. 
The Kano model states that dissatisfiers (basic factors) are hard to elicit. 
Which of the techniques mentioned below is the most effective elicitation 
technique for dissatisfiers? (1 answer) 
A0312 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Prototyping 
 
 
B) Questionnaire 
 
 
C) Field observation 
 
 
D) Brainstorming 
 
 
29. 
Which two of the following aspects are the most important to consider 
when choosing suitable elicitation techniques? (2 answers) 
P0313 
2 Points 
 
 
A) The availability of the involved people. 
 
 
B) The preferences of the requirements engineer. 
 
 
C) The category of requirements based on Kano classification. 
 
 
D) The complexity of the required tools. 
 
 
E) The habitual use of a technique. 
 
 
30. 
Which of the following techniques is NOT suitable for resolving 
requirements conflicts? (1 answer) 
A3410 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Overruling 
 
 
B) Definition of variants 
 
 
C) Compromise 
 
 
D) Sampling 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
20 | 26 
31.  
Which are the two most important attributes in a stakeholder list? 
(2 answers) 
P3411 
2 Points 
 
 
A) Their function/role 
 
 
B) Their personal preferences 
 
 
C) Their boss 
 
 
D) Their relevance 
 
 
E) Their previous projects 
 
 
32. 
What are the two key advantages of using questionnaires for requirements 
elicitation? (2 answers) 
P0314 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Questionnaires allow a high number of participants. 
 
 
B) Questionnaires allow statistically relevant statements on requirements. 
 
 
C) Questionnaires allow the participants' understanding to be validated. 
 
 
D) Questionnaires allow to obtain the most insights on delighters (excitement 
factors). 
 
 
E) Questionnaires allow to address the needs of individual stakeholders easily. 
 
 
33. 
Which of the following statements about elicitation techniques are true 
and which are false? 
K0324 
2 Points 
 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
 
A) An interview is a gathering technique. 
 
 
 
 
B) An analogy technique is a gathering technique. 
 
 
 
 
C) System archeology is an observation technique. 
 
 
 
 
D) Apprenticing is an observation technique. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
21 | 26 
34. 
For a navigation system that is to be used internationally, a stakeholder 
demands a female voice only for the voice output. Another stakeholder 
considers this discriminatory and demands a male voice in addition. 
Which of the following types of conflicts describes this conflict best? 
(1 answer) 
A0720 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Relationship conflict 
 
 
A) Interest conflict 
 
 
B) Structural conflict 
 
 
C) Value conflict 
 
 
35. 
In your project, a new braking system for high speed trains is developed. 
Which validation technique is most suitable for this situation, where the 
system requirements of a safety-critical component should be validated? 
(1 answer) 
A0721 
2 Points 
 
 
A) A/B testing 
 
 
B) Prototype 
 
 
C) Walkthrough 
 
 
D) Inspection 
 
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
22 | 26 
5. 
Process and Working Structure 
36. 
Which two major facets below are the most important to consider when 
configuring an RE process? (2 answers) 
P3504 
2 Points 
 
 
A) The time facet: linear vs. iterative 
 
 
B) The budget facet: tight vs. large 
 
 
C) The purpose facet: prescriptive vs. explorative 
 
 
D) The methodology facet: structure-based vs. process-based 
 
 
E) The interaction facet: team-driven vs. individual-driven 
 
 
37. 
Based on an analysis of the influencing factors, a suitable combination of 
process facets should be configured. In practice, some specific 
combinations of facets frequently occur. 
Which one of the combinations mentioned below is NOT recognized as 
such? (1 answer) 
A3505 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Product-oriented RE process (iterative, explorative, market oriented) 
 
 
B) Human-oriented RE process (linear, process-based, individual) 
 
 
C) Participatory RE process (iterative, explorative, customer specific) 
 
 
D) Contractual RE process (linear, prescriptive, customer specific) 
 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
23 | 26 
6. 
Management Practices for Requirements 
38. Which of the following statements about views on requirements are true and 
which are false? 
K0819 
2 Points 
 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
A) Not every stakeholder needs to have access to all requirements. 
 
 
 
 
B) Requirements that belong together can be grouped to support the 
review. 
 
 
 
 
C) Requirements can be hidden from unauthorized stakeholders. 
 
 
 
 
D) It is assured that several people can work on one specification at the 
same time. 
 
 
 
39. The traceability of requirements has several goals. 
Indicate the statement that is NOT correct. (1 answer) 
A0820 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Traceability facilitates an impact analysis. 
 
 
B) Traceability facilitates the verification of implementation. 
 
 
C) Traceability facilitates exports from a requirements management tool. 
 
 
D) Traceability facilitates finding a requirement's source. 
 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
24 | 26 
40. Additional information on requirements is managed using attributes. An 
example of such additional information is a unique identifier. 
Which of the following statements regarding the purpose of unique identifiers 
are true and which are false? 
Unique identifiers are helpful ... 
K0821 
2 Points 
 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
A) ... for estimating the overall size of a specification. 
 
 
 
 
B) ... for having an unambiguous basis for communication. 
 
 
 
 
C) ... for establishing references to other requirements. 
 
 
 
 
D) ... for establishing traceability to other development artifacts. 
 
 
 
41.  
You have produced a requirements baseline and delivered it to development. 
In the meantime, stakeholders have submitted change requests for 
requirements of this baseline. 
Which of the following answers represent correct change management for 
requirements? (2 answers) 
P0838 
2 Points 
 
 
A) Changes with regard to requirements that are part of the baseline are 
implemented through the creation of new versions of the requirements within this 
requirements baseline. 
 
 
B) Prior to adjusting the requirements to the change requests, the impact of the 
changes has to be determined. 
 
 
C) Change requests can be submitted at any time and may be considered for 
development when creating a future baseline. 
 
 
D) Time-critical change requests are neither analyzed nor estimated but delivered 
directly to development. 
 
 
E) If the development for changed requirements has not started yet, the change can 
easily be processed without creating a new baseline. 
 
 

--- PAGE 25 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
25 | 26 
42. 
Attributes are used to manage additional characteristics of requirements. 
Priority is one example of such a requirements attribute. 
Which of the following statements on the reason for prioritizing 
requirements are true and which are false? 
A reason for prioritizing is ... 
K0802 
2 Points 
 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
 
A) ... to decide which requirements are to be implemented in the next 
release. 
 
 
 
 
B) ... to decide on which requirements to focus first in testing. 
 
 
 
 
C) ... to document how much it would cost to implement a requirement. 
 
 
 
 
D) ... to recognize which requirements can be reused. 
 
 
 
43. 
Version and configuration management are used for managing 
requirements and requirements specifications. "Version" and "baseline" are 
two frequently used terms in this context. 
Select the best description of a baseline. (1 answer) 
A0804 
1 Point 
 
 
A) A version of a requirement 
 
 
B) A released configuration of an individual requirement 
 
 
C) A released configuration of requirements 
 
 
D) A not yet released version of a requirements specification 
 
 

--- PAGE 26 ---
 
Foundation Level | Examination 
© IREB 
26 | 26 
7. 
Tool Support 
44. As a Requirements Engineer for a company, you have to choose a tool to 
support your Requirements Engineering process. 
In this context, which of the following statements are true and which are 
false? 
K0910 
2 Points 
 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
A) The tool has to support the artifacts demanded in the Requirements 
Engineering process applied. 
 
 
 
 
B) The choice of a tool should be left to the users of the tool. 
 
 
 
 
C) The tool has to assist users to set up their test cases as part of the 
Requirements Engineering process to support shift-left testing. 
 
 
 
 
D) The choice of a tool is influenced by the tool chain (e.g., configuration 
management tool) the tool is to be applied in. 
 
 
 
45. 
Which of the following tasks is NOT a capability of a tool, that supports the 
management of requirements in the Requirements Engineering process? 
(1 answer) 
A0922 
1 Point 
 
 
A) Tracking logical relationships between requirements 
 
 
B) Modelling of requirements 
 
 
C) Measuring and reporting of the Requirements Engineering process 
 
 
D) Providing support for the prioritization of requirements 
 
 
